European Central Bank
Directorate General Communications
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
Combined monetary policy decisions and
statement
19 March 2026
Monetary policy decisions
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. It is
determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at the 2% target in the medium term. The war in the
Middle East has made the outlook significantly more uncertain, creating upside risks for inflation and
downside risks for economic growth. It will have a material impact on near-term inflation through
higher energy prices. Its medium-term implications will depend both on the intensity and duration of
the conflict and on how energy prices affect consumer prices and the economy.
The Governing Council is well positioned to navigate this uncertainty. Inflation has been at around the
2% target, longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored, and the economy has shown
resilience over recent quarters. The incoming information in the period ahead will help the Governing
Council assess how the war will affect the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it. The Governing
Council is closely monitoring the situation, and its data-dependent approach will help it set monetary
policy as appropriate.
The new ECB staff projections exceptionally incorporate information up to 11 March, a later cut-off
date than usual. In the baseline, headline inflation is seen to average 2.6% in 2026, 2.0% in 2027 and
2.1% in 2028. Inflation has been revised up compared with the December projections, especially for
2026. This is because energy prices will be higher owing to the war in the Middle East. For inflation
excluding energy and food, staff project an average of 2.3% in 2026, 2.2% in 2027 and 2.1% in 2028.
This is also higher than the path in the December projections, mainly owing to higher energy prices
feeding into inflation excluding energy and food. Staff expect economic growth to average 0.9% in
2026, 1.3% in 2027 and 1.4% in 2028. This implies a downward revision, especially for 2026,
reflecting the global effects of the war on commodity markets, real incomes and confidence. At the
same time, low unemployment, solid private sector balance sheets, and public spending on defence
and infrastructure should continue to underpin growth.
In line with the Governing Council’s monetary policy strategy commitment to incorporate risks and
uncertainty into its decision-making, staff also assessed how the war in the Middle East could affect
economic growth and inflation under some alternative illustrative scenarios. These scenarios will be
published with the staff projections on the ECB’s website. The scenario analysis suggests that a
prolonged disruption in the supply of oil and gas would result in inflation being above, and growth
being below, the baseline projections. The implications for medium-term inflation depend crucially on
the magnitude of indirect and second-round effects of a stronger and more persistent energy shock.
The Governing Council will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining
the appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, its interest rate decisions will be based on its
assessment of the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and
financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy
transmission. The Governing Council is not pre-committing to a particular rate path.
Key ECB interest rates
The interest rates on the deposit facility, the main refinancing operations and the marginal lending
facility will remain unchanged at 2.00%, 2.15% and 2.40% respectively.
Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency
purchase programme (PEPP)
The APP and PEPP portfolios are declining at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem
no longer reinvests the principal payments from maturing securities.
***
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that
inflation stabilises at its 2% target in the medium term and to preserve the smooth functioning of
monetary policy transmission. Moreover, the Transmission Protection Instrument is available to
counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the transmission of
monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to more effectively
deliver on its price stability mandate.
The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press
conference starting at 14:45 CET today.
Monetary policy statement
Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB,
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. We are
determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at our two per cent target in the medium term. The war in
the Middle East has made the outlook significantly more uncertain, creating upside risks for inflation
and downside risks for economic growth. It will have a material impact on near-term inflation through
higher energy prices. Its medium-term implications will depend both on the intensity and duration of
the conflict and on how energy prices affect consumer prices and the economy.
We are well positioned to navigate this uncertainty. Inflation has been at around our two per cent
target, longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored, and the economy has shown resilience
over recent quarters. The incoming information in the period ahead will help us assess how the war
will affect the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it. We are closely monitoring the situation, and
our data-dependent approach will help us set monetary policy as appropriate.
The new ECB staff projections exceptionally incorporate information up to 11 March, a later cut-off
date than usual. In the baseline, headline inflation is seen to average 2.6 per cent in 2026, 2.0 per
cent in 2027 and 2.1 per cent in 2028. Inflation has been revised up compared with the December
projections, especially for 2026. This is because energy prices will be higher owing to the war in the
Middle East. For inflation excluding energy and food, staff project an average of 2.3 per cent in 2026,
2.2 per cent in 2027 and 2.1 per cent in 2028. This is also higher than the path in the December
projections, mainly owing to higher energy prices feeding into inflation excluding energy and food.
Staff expect economic growth to average 0.9 per cent in 2026, 1.3 per cent in 2027 and 1.4 per cent in
2028. This implies a downward revision, especially for 2026, reflecting the global effects of the war on
commodity markets, real incomes and confidence. At the same time, low unemployment, solid private
sector balance sheets, and public spending on defence and infrastructure should continue to underpin
growth.
In line with our monetary policy strategy commitment to incorporate risks and uncertainty into our
decision-making, staff also assessed how the war in the Middle East could affect economic growth
and inflation under some alternative illustrative scenarios. These scenarios will be published with the
staff projections on our website. The scenario analysis suggests that a prolonged disruption in the
supply of oil and gas would result in inflation being above, and growth being below, the baseline
projections. The implications for medium-term inflation depend crucially on the magnitude of indirect
and second-round effects of a stronger and more persistent energy shock.
We will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate
monetary policy stance. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of
the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and financial data,
as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We
are not pre-committing to a particular rate path.
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.
Economic activity
The economy grew by 0.2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2025, driven by stronger domestic demand.
Households increased their spending as real incomes rose and unemployment remained close to its
historical low. Construction and housing renovation strengthened, and firms invested more, particularly
in areas such as research and development, software and databases. Growth was no longer weighed
down by net exports as it had been in the previous two quarters. It was underpinned mainly by
services.
Staff still see private consumption as the main driver of growth over the medium term. Investment
should also continue to grow, with governments spending more on defence and infrastructure, and
firms increasingly investing in new digital technologies. The external environment remains challenging,
including in light of volatile global trade policies.
The war in the Middle East is disrupting commodity markets and weighing on real incomes and
confidence. This has led to a downward revision of consumption and investment in the baseline staff
projections, especially for 2026. The impact would be even more pronounced in alternative scenarios
with a more severe and prolonged energy shock.
The Governing Council highlights the urgent need to strengthen the euro area economy while
maintaining sound public finances. Any fiscal responses to the energy price shock should be
temporary, targeted and tailored. The current energy crisis underscores the imperative to further
reduce dependence on fossil fuels. Completing the savings and investments union is vital to fund
innovation and support the green and digital transitions. The digital euro and tokenised wholesale
central bank money will enhance Europe’s strategic autonomy, competitiveness and financial
integration, and will boost innovation in payments. It is thus essential to swiftly adopt the Regulation on
the establishment of the digital euro. Simplifying and harmonising rules across the EU’s Single Market
will help European firms grow faster.
Inflation
Inflation rose to 1.9 per cent in February, from 1.7 per cent in January. Energy prices were 3.1 per
cent lower than a year ago, after being 4.0 per cent lower in January. Food price inflation edged down
to 2.5 per cent. Inflation excluding energy and food increased to 2.4 per cent in February, from 2.2 per
cent in January. The increase reflected goods inflation rising to 0.7 per cent from 0.4 per cent and
services inflation moving up to 3.4 per cent from 3.2 per cent.
Indicators of underlying inflation have changed little over recent months and remain consistent with
our two per cent medium-term target. Corporate profits recovered further in the fourth quarter of 2025,
while unit labour costs rose at a similar rate as in the previous quarter. Growth in compensation per
employee slowed to 3.7 per cent, from 4.0 per cent in the third quarter. Negotiated wage growth and
forward-looking indicators, such as the ECB’s wage tracker and surveys on wage expectations,
suggest that labour costs will ease further in the course of 2026, which should support the return of
inflation to target.
The increase in energy prices caused by the war will drive inflation above 2 per cent in the near term.
If persistent, higher energy prices may lead to a broader increase in inflation through indirect and
second-round effects, a situation which requires close monitoring. Inflation expectations in the
financial markets have moved up significantly over shorter horizons. Most measures of longer-term
inflation expectations stand at around 2 per cent, supporting the stabilisation of inflation around our
target.
Risk assessment
The risks to the growth outlook are tilted to the downside, especially in the near term. The war in the
Middle East is a downside risk to the euro area economy, adding to the volatile global policy
environment. A prolonged war could increase energy prices further and for longer than currently
expected, and also weigh on confidence. These factors would erode incomes and make firms and
households more reluctant to invest and spend. A worsening of global financial market sentiment
could further dampen demand. Additional frictions in international trade could disrupt supply chains,
reduce exports and weaken consumption and investment. Other geopolitical tensions, in particular
Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine, remain a major source of uncertainty. By contrast, growth
could turn out to be higher if the economic repercussions of the war in the Middle East proved to be
more short-lived than currently expected. Moreover, planned defence and infrastructure spending,
reforms to enhance productivity, and euro area firms adopting new technologies may drive up growth
by more than expected. New trade agreements and a deeper integration of the Single Market could
also boost growth beyond current expectations.
The risks to the inflation outlook are tilted to the upside, especially in the near term. A prolonged war in
the Middle East could lead to a larger and longer-lasting upward shift in energy prices than currently
expected, raising euro area inflation further. This could be reinforced and become more persistent if
inflation expectations and wage growth were to rise in response, if the energy price increase were to
spill over to non-energy inflation to a larger extent than assumed in the baseline, or if the war
disrupted global supply chains more broadly. Ongoing trade tensions could also give rise to more
fragmented global supply chains, curtail the supply of critical raw materials and tighten capacity
constraints in the euro area economy. By contrast, inflation could turn out to be lower if the economic
repercussions of the war in the Middle East proved to be more short-lived or if indirect and secondround effects proved less pronounced than currently expected. Inflation could also be lower if tariffs
reduced demand for euro area exports by more than expected and if countries with overcapacity
increased further their exports to the euro area. More volatile and risk-averse financial markets could
weigh on demand and thereby lower inflation as well.
Financial and monetary conditions
The war in the Middle East has had a pronounced impact on global financial markets. Overall financial
conditions have tightened since our last meeting. Stock markets have fallen and market interest rates
in the euro area, especially short-term rates, have risen notably.
In January, bank lending rates for firms and the cost of issuing market-based debt both remained at
3.6 per cent, while the average interest rate on new mortgages edged up to 3.4 per cent. Bank lending
to firms grew by 2.8 per cent on a yearly basis in January, down from 3.0 per cent in December.
However, this was offset by stronger issuance of corporate bonds, with the annual growth rate rising to
4.0 per cent, from 3.5 per cent in December. Mortgage lending grew by 3.0 per cent, unchanged from
December.
Conclusion
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. We are
determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at our two per cent target in the medium term. We will
follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary
policy stance. Our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook and
the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and financial data, as well as the dynamics
of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to
a particular rate path.
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation
stabilises sustainably at our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary
policy transmission.
We are now ready to take your questions.